When he survives and comes back, the board
recreated the system administration. Do you have
any idea how that idea came back? Was that a board
idea or do you have any idea? Well, I think
basically was that at that point in time,
They wanted to separate the presidency of Texas
A&M University from the chancellorship.
And
that particular concept, there was a going about
of, well, we need an agricultural man. And who do we
want to get this agricultural man with? Who, all
right, who was pushing that idea? Was that a board?
That was sort of out there. Probably the board
picked it up. There was certain people that
thought maybe we needed an agricultural person to
take the thing at the university. Yeah. Because it
was an agricultural institution. We'd had
liberal arts people and namely a history man like
Jack Williams. And so
that's essentially was the decision in which it
went. All right, as the board is getting ready for
the meeting where they're going to decide who the
new president is going to be, Were you aware of any
kind of plan for who might be that new president in
1977?
77, yes indeed. How were you aware of it? Well,
people told you. I was on the opposite side. Okay.
As a matter of fact, they were going down and
picking a person that was reporting to me. And I
knew that and I knew the political situations and I
could see the actions going across the hall. As far
as you're aware, did he pick them or did they pick
him? Ty Timm was at the heart of all of us. I did not
know that. This is the chairman of, I mean the
department head of agricultural economics.
Agricultural economics. They said, well, we want
to have somebody in agriculture, and of course the
best person that we can get in agriculture is an
agricultural economist. This was Ty Timm. And Ty
Timm thought, well, who do we have that we can push
forward in this situation? Well, Carver's name
came up.
at that point in time there was designated
contacts that were made at that at a group meeting
and I am at that it was Shipley's Donut Shop
and Bob Cherry had one Pat Wooten had some contacts
to be made and and so it went well Reagan Brown was
there and he went to see the governor
and governor calls The chairman of the board would
say, I think you ought to consider strongly. Now,
who was the governor then? Was this Mark White? No,
this was Dolph Briscoe. Was it Briscoe still? No.
And how far ahead of time did you hear about this,
this plan? Well, I knew that, I don't know whether
it was planned, but I think it was worked out at the
board meeting. I think that the pressure was
building and enough and I knew at it because
frankly Jarvis walked in and asked me to support
him and I hemmed and hawed and that was my end of
friendship with Jarvis for a long time. Because
this is a note to the typist, you can include this. I
heard about this plan and the way I heard about it
was that various members of Jarvis Miller's staff
were assigned to make phone calls and make
contacts and then to check back and see had
so-and-so spoken to this one or that one, which
board members were in agreement and which ones
were not yet. And I then called a friend that I asked
him to never reveal my name and I would never reveal
his, but he was a close friend of John Lindsay. one
of our outstanding former students in Houston,
and I knew that John Lindsay was very close to Dr.
Williams. And I didn't think Dr. Williams knew
about this plan. And so two or three days after I
called this anonymous friend, he called me back
and told me that he had passed this information on
to Lindsay. Lindsay had passed it on to President
Williams, and Williams had told him that whomever
this person was They didn't know what they were
talking about because he was the one to make the
recommendation as to who the new president would
be to the Board of Regents, and that Jarvis
Miller's name had not even been mentioned. A week
later, just before the board meeting, I got a
second call from this anonymous friend in which
Williams had called John Lindsay back and said,
I'm being overwhelmed. Phone calls, letters,
telegrams, and everything else. My arm is being
broken at the socket. What was the general
reaction as far as you were aware in agriculture on
campus and off campus? I think general reaction,
at least to start with, was good acceptance.
And when Jarvis came in, did he attempt to change
anything in agriculture? Well, yes. I mean, he
attempted to change the structure because at the
time the Jarvis came in, I was the Experiment
Station Director reported to me, the Extension
Director reported to me, and he was going to take
those out and put those into vice presidents,
namely Perry Atkinson, and then he picked an
associate vice president, namely O.D. Butler,
who he thought would be able to handle the
extension pieces of this kind of thing. And they
would report directly to him? And they would
report directly to him. Around you as the dean?
Around me as the dean, and I would report to the
regular dean, the academic approach, because he
had, Mac Prescott was named academic vice
president shortly thereafter. Let's back up.
While Cal, under Dr. Williams, John C. Calhoun had
been vice president for academic affairs.
Describe what it was like to be a dean reporting to
Dr. Calhoun? It was an interesting kind of a thing.
Dr. Calhoun was generally
straightforward and accepted, and we could
discuss things, but occasionally he would blow
his top. Just a second, let me be sure that I didn't
turn this thing. He would lose his temper, I should
say. Calhoun did? Yeah. Oh, let's see. I never saw
that. Go ahead. And he would come down on you, but
almost immediately thereafter, it was a matter
forgotten, and the issues began. Work was the
thing, so you could work with the fellow. During
those, Calhoun... I had a lot of confidence in John
Calhoun. During those Calhoun-Williams years,
who were your favorite, I'm not going to ask you the
negative, who were your favorite dean
colleagues, the ones that were best to work with?
I'm not sure I had a favorite. Meaning you liked
them all? I generally liked them all. I mean, we got
along all right. Although sometimes the votes in
those days used to be 10 to 1. Do you remember any
important idea you had that Calhoun didn't
accept?
Calhoun and Williams? Not really. They had some
ideas that I wouldn't accept. And it passed on.
Such as? Well, that we didn't need all these
animals, as far as this is concerned. We could use
artificial types of things and animals, using the
petroleum engineering as a model in his own mind.
Were we making real progress in those years, the
Rudder-Williams years? Oh, yes.
In hindsight, how well prepared for the job was
Williams for A&M at the time he was here?
Dr. Williams
was the man for the time. I sure feel that way. He was
the man. John Calhoun was the man for the time. And I
didn't feel pushback or anything of a sort
relative to the, relative
to working with either one of the two. And I had more
difficulty with Jarvis Miller because obviously
I was, I didn't generally consider him as
presidential material. Maybe you ought not put
that in. As far as you know, what was the process
Jarvis used to select the new vice president of
academic affairs? He listened to me. Did he? Okay.
All right. Did he call and ask advice? No, I
volunteered it. Oh, okay. All right. And the
reason why I volunteered it is that I wanted a
friend in that office. Oh, okay. All right. All
right. Who else did you think might have been
selected? I don't know. I really didn't question
it at all. Okay. Because, you see, Mack was
president, was dean of science. He would be well
accepted. He was well accepted on the campus and
things. Did Jarvis give you and or Mac give you
deans any directions of what to do or not to do?
Occasionally we'd get small pieces of advice and
most of it would be policy discussions and this
kind of a thing. But did things continue to
function pretty well? I thought they functioned a
lot better than I thought they would because at
that point in time I My profile became much lower
than it had been.
Alright, and the reorganizational change did
occur. It occurred. It occurred. And am I correct
that those, the two directors, Experiment
Station and Extension Service, in fact though,
instead of reporting to Jarvis, ended up
reporting to the system, didn't they? That was
after a time, and I'm not quite sure I understand
what process went through along this particular
line. But they,
whether it was because Clyde Freeman was in the
system office and there was a growing tagging,
there was growing friction between Jarvis Miller
and Frank Hubert. After, after Dr. Williams.
Yeah, and that, that Frank Hubert went up and
suggested the rearrangement, and so Atkinson and
Butler, instead of being vice presidents, became
vice chancellors and reported directly to the
chancellor. And essentially that is the
structure that is, which we've inherited so far.
The major change happened in 1988.
when Charles Arntzen came in as Deputy
Chancellor, or whatever they called him, of
Agriculture, and he became Dean at that point.
When I retired as Dean, and he picked up the Dean's
title, he had the Directorship title, and only a
couple of years ago, or years ago, Hyler has picked
up the Extension Director title.
When those two administrative units were
separated out of your authority under Dr. Miller,
was it more difficult then to get the
regular task of agriculture accomplished? Yes, I
think so, because you had to deal with other people
and had to convince other people. In the early
days, there were certain things that O.D. Butler
had on his agenda, and he was able to work with Perry
Atchison to get those into the play. And I didn't
particularly agree with that approach at all. And
so the only thing is that I just took it to a point and
dropped the matter.
And usually sometime later, it fell my duty to
clean up the mess. Were you and other deans aware of
Dr. Miller's approaching problems with the
board? Yes, I was. Because I had, I was called aside
by Frank Hubert. In advance? In advance. Are you at
liberty to say how far? Days? Hours? It was a month
or so. Oh, okay. Okay. See, the fundamental issue
as far as I was able to determine was that
In the utilization of funding, historically,
there has always been amount of the available fund
made available into the budget of the university.
And presidents like Rudder and Williams always
turned a lot of that back. But Jarvis and Mac
Prescott decided, well, it had been
appropriated. They were going to spend it. And
this, of course, horrified Clyde Freeman, as it
never had been before, because it was always been a
working gentleman's agreement that that money
would come back and do this kind of thing. So they
began to press Jarvis to stop spending this money.
And Jarvis simply said no. He had the authority,
and he proceeded to go ahead and do it.
And so I think that was at the heart. There may have
been other aspects that were at the heart of the
situation. But
I was called in by the chancellor. Well, actually,
I wasn't called in. The legislature was going on at
that particular point, and there was a hearing on
the real estate center. And the chancellor was
there, and he said, what am I going to do? I said, I
don't know. I said, you need somebody that Jarvis
appreciates and to move the, to get him to work with
you. because when I was, when he reported to me, I
didn't, I normally just took things over and said,
okay, you do it, and he did it.
And I think there may have been some feeling as far
as this is concerned. All right, then the official
action to terminate Dr. Miller as president
occurred in the in June of 1980. It was 1980. I was I
was in Mexico at the time. How'd you hear about it?
The secretary called. He got me on the phone and
told me about it. Were, so, and the appointment of
Chuck Sampson, were you and other deans surprised
at Chuck's appointment? I was, yes.
Chuck, I heard that. The, did, did Dr. Sampson,
when you got back from Mexico, was there any change
in the, None whatsoever, except that Sampson
asked me to come up and explain the program that I
was in, where my goals were, and things of this
sort. All right, and then after about a year,
Vandiver is selected. How did he introduce
himself to you and the other key administrators on
the campus?
Let's see, what was it? There was a problem that
existed shortly after
he became president. And there was, I don't
recall, and the whole faculty met. And that was
essentially the first time I'd heard of Vandiver.
How did he do with the whole faculty? Well, he
offered to resign. And the faculty, almost
unanimously, came up and started, you know, some
of us said, well, what's going on here? And so one or
two people start standing up and said, we're for
you. And then so they sort of had the crowd. So that
was the end of that situation. But I don't recall
the details of the problem. Did you take him, did he
travel around to see all the centers? He traveled
around to see the centers. He and I had, I enjoyed
working with him. particularly in certain
international situations that we got and we
resolved some international programs together.
We had a problem that occurred in Saudi Arabia
and I I finally just decided I was going to, they
came in and talked to me, and I just finally just
went in to President Vandiver and said, look, just
make me chair in charge of this particular program
until I can get it settled. And he did, and then he
immediately went to Saudi Arabia and shook hands
with those people, and everything was settled.
Dr. Prescott was the Vice President of Academic
Affairs. and during those Miller and early
Vandiver years and so I'm assuming that he
understood agriculture well. He understood it a
lot better and he was he was clearly a friend. And
then who follows him? Who's after after Mack who is
the next? I don't recall. And you're dean until 88?
I'm dean until February 29, 1988.
During those years,
do you feel that we would have made more progress if
the old administrative structure had still been
in place? Of the same academic person being
responsible for the college, the... station and
the service?
Maybe, maybe not. I don't know.
I did the best I could under the circumstances. I
had a great deal to do with hiring faculty and
appointment of heads of departments and things of
this sort. So as far as the college itself is
concerned, in the college during those years
particularly, who are some of the, as you look
back, who are some of the greatest appointments
you are proud to claim? Well, I was glad to appoint
Perry Atkinson as head of department. I know the
answers to this, but why? Why would you be proud of
Perry Atkinson? Well, he was a man who knew both the
practical and the science.
Was he congenial to work with? Yes, he was. We
worked together. Fact is, almost a day after I was
appointed, in fact, the day before I became
appointed, it was announced, and that wasn't even
the place. I went down to South Texas, and we fought
a battle down there together. We fought many
battles together, because seemingly
entomologists always invented a new problem.
uh because Perry a truly outstanding researcher
am I correct in that yes but also up to the time he was
uh doing his research when he went into
administration he lost his yeah and he came back it
was uh but at the same time he seemed to me to be
realistic is that right you have to say that you
have to say that I think the only thing I regret as
far as his chancellorship was concerned is that he
up and left it.
And as a matter of fact, he left Dean Charlie Arnson
up high and dry. What about other key appointments
that you're proud of to look back on? Well, I think
Gene Sanders was one of them. What was his
department? His biochemistry, biophysics at
that particular point, was one because he made a
change that I wanted to make, and that's kind of a
thing. Zerl Carpenter was a good man, but he didn't
last long because they took him and made him
director of the Extension Service. And Zerl was in
what department? He was in animal science. Animal
science. Did he follow OD? He followed OD. Let's go
back and describe O.D. Butler as a department
head. His manner and style, strengths,
weaknesses, if he had any. O.D. Butler had a wealth
of ideas. And what he needed most was somebody to
filter them.
Was there ever such a person? There was. Who? Me.
Oh, okay, okay. Yeah, as dean. As dean, yeah, yeah.
And he would carry on and we worked together. We put
this, essentially made the movement together to
put this building in place. And
he had, it was, I admired him as far as this was
concerned. And he was a strong-willed leader of
the department wasn't he? He was a strong-willed
leader
he did some things that I don't think were very good
things to do but
he his problem was fundamentally he was a
strong-willed leader he was a charismatic leader
in a way but O.D. Butler principal problem was that
he experienced In other words, his academic
experience was largely A&M and a year or two at
Michigan State. And as a result, his vision
of what could be in terms of a larger major
university was somewhat smaller than So, all
right, then describe what would be the ideal
experience for a key leader at a school like Texas
A&M. Where should they have been? I
think they need to be at one of the major land-grant
universities.
Bowen came from Oklahoma State, fine.
And I would name those universities as being
Cornell, Rutgers, Penn State,
Virginia Tech, Florida,
maybe Wisconsin. Wisconsin's problem is their
undergraduate program.
Their graduate program is superb.
Cal Davis.
Minnesota.
Michigan State? I meant to mention Michigan
State, yeah. I did not mean to leave them out. I
think Iowa State has moved a great deal forward.
For a long while they were falling back pretty
heavily. I don't know about Illinois.
I don't know about Purdue.
Do you think in terms of say agriculture, I'm
thinking in terms yeah basically but nonetheless
I'm thinking in terms of the land-grant concept.
Do you think Texas A&M has a chance in year 2020 to be
one of the top 10 public institutions? Oh I expect
so public yes top 10 is a pretty large number
Because I think that Florida, NC State, Arizona,
and Washington among the publics are now making
real progress. University of Washington, not
Washington State. No, no, not Washington State.
That they are really moving upward as publics, as
we are moving upward. But then to be in the top ten,
then you've got to crowd some of those others out.
Yeah, that's going to be difficult to do. We're
talking about other key appointments that you're
proud to remember and key associates during your
deaning years. I guess I don't... I have trouble
remembering names. What about some faculty hires
that you...
Did we go get any true all-stars? Yeah, we got some
all-stars.
Let's see, where's the catalog here? I'll try
that.
I think we have...
I was trying to think of the name.
Did anyone ever try to get you to add any programs
that we didn't do at all? Most of those were some of
my own invention. Such as? Undergraduate degrees
in genetics, degrees in nutrition.
What is the name? I'm having trouble remembering
it. Max Summers is the one I was thinking of. What's
his specialty? Etymology. We hired him cheaply
from the University of Texas. Perry hired him. He
came in and, of course, he's a member of the
National Academy now.
See, I have a theory that the way to really attract
national attention quickly is to hire a few stars.
But he wasn't a star when he came here. But he was
about to be, wasn't he? Wasn't he about to be?
Wasn't he clearly on the way? I think he was on the
way up, but as I said, we hired him rather
inexpensively. And of course, he's come along
since that particular point in time. Now, during
those years, you were dean for how many years?
Twenty years. I was acting dean from September 1,
67 to
February 28. So were you the longest serving dean
in modern times at A&M? In agriculture. Or any
other? Who else served longer than 20? Well, Kyle.
Oh, okay. Some of the early ones. Yeah, but in the
last 40, 50 years, has anybody been a dean for 20
years? 21, 20 and a half years. During the time when
you were dean, what was your normal workday
routine? What time did you get up and get to the
office? I got to the office generally about 8.30.
I was never here at 8, never in the office at 8. And
what was...